docs: Adding dtensor TP debugging summary (#1767)
NVIDIA-NeMo/RL: docs/guides/dtensor-tp-accuracy.md

# DTensor Tensor Parallel Accuracy Issue

> During reinforcement learning (RL) post training, maintaining accuracy is both **critical and challenging**. Minor numerical deviations can propagate and amplify across policy updates, ultimately distorting reward signals and affecting convergence. Consequently, understanding and mitigating accuracy issues is central to ensuring consistent and reliable training behavior in large-scale distributed RL settings. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During reinforcement learning (RL) post-training, maintaining accuracy is both **critical and challenging**. Minor numerical deviations can propagate and amplify across policy updates, ultimately distorting reward signals and affecting convergence. Consequently, understanding and mitigating accuracy issues is central to ensuring consistent and reliable training behavior in large-scale distributed RL settings.
```

m_i        & : \text{mask the } i^{th} \text{ token , whether 1 or 0}  \\
&\text{global-valid-toks}  = \sum_i m_i \, . \\
& \text{token-mult-prob-error}= \frac{1}{\text{global-valid-toks}}\sum_{i} m_i \exp\left(\left|g_i - p_i\right|\right)
\end{aligned}
$$

In general, **generation logprobs** and **policy logprobs** should align closely, resulting in a `token_mult_prob_error` value near **1.0**. In our development, when this metric exceeds **1.05**, we consider it indicative of a potential framework issue that warrants further investigation.

As shown in Figure 1, numerous spikes can be observed during training. Occasional spikes are acceptable if the `token_mult_prob_error` quickly returns to around 1.0. However, in this case, even with EMA smoothing applied, the figure reveals an overall upward trend, which is unacceptable and indicates a persistent misalignment between the training and inference behaviors.

<img src="../assets/dtensor-tp-accuracy/token_mult_prob_error_qwen3_4B.png" alt="The token_mult_prob_error for Qwen3-4B" style="zoom:33%;" />

<p align="center"><em>Fig 1: The token_mult_prob_error of Qwen3-4B</em></p>

> ### 1.2 Discrepancies Across TP Configurations in Reward Modeling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Discrepancies Across TP Configurations in Reward Modeling
```

|               | TP=1   | TP=2   | TP=4   | TP=8   |
| ------------- | ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |
| With autocast | 0.6035 | 0.6010 | 0.5864 | 0.6021 |
| W/O autocast  | 0.6035 | 0.6010 | 0.5864 | 0.6021 |
<p align="center"><em>Table 1: The validation loss of reward model training</em></p> 

### 1.3  Overall Performance Degradation Under Tensor Parallelism

Figure 2 and Figure 3 present the reward curves and validation accuracy curves for multiple runs under different tensor parallel (TP) configurations. We also apply EMA smoothing for better visualization. The mismatch between the policy engine and the generation engine can lead to degraded downstream accuracy. This issue is most evident in the blue and purple curves, whose corresponding experiments are also the most abnormal cases observed in Figure 1. 

> Combine the three images for observation, it's not true that abnormal `token_mult_prob_error` must lead to abnormal reward and validation accuracy. This is because for several reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Combining the three images for observation, it is not necessarily true that abnormal `token_mult_prob_error` leads to abnormal reward and validation accuracy. This occurs for several reasons:
```

&= \exp\left(\log\left(\frac{\text{current-probs}}{\text{prev-probs}}\right)\right) \\
&= \frac{\text{current-probs}}{\text{prev-probs}}
\end{aligned}
$$

This ratio is the standard importance ratio used in off-policy RL to reweight returns when the data are collected under an older behavior policy.  In on-policy training, this ratio should be exactly 1.  However, in our experiments, we observed cases where the ratio deviates from 1, indicating a mismatch between the intended on-policy setting and the actual behavior of the system. Figure 4 and Figure 5 illustrate this phenomenon by showing the mismatch between `prev_logprobs` and `current_logprobs` under TP=4, as well as the reward curves under TP=4 and TP=1 for the `deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B` model.

![](../assets/dtensor-tp-accuracy/logprobs_unequal_1.png)

<p align="center"><em>Fig 4: The mismatch of prev_logprobs and current_logprobs under TP=4</em></p>

<img src="../assets/dtensor-tp-accuracy/image-20260111160656891-1768118824549-2.png" alt="image-20260111160656891" style="zoom: 25%;" />

<p align="center"><em>Fig 5: The reward of deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B under TP=4 and TP=1</em></p>

> ### 2.1 Root Cause

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Root Cause
```

After aligning `train_micro_batch_size` and `logprob_batch_size` so that the same samples are processed with identical effective batch configurations, the importance-sampling ratio (`probs_ratio`) becomes 1 as expected, and the observed accuracy issues disappear. This confirms that the mismatch was caused by batch-dependent numerical variation rather than a conceptual error in the RL objective or data pipeline.

Importantly, this problem is **model-specific** rather than universal. Models such as `deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B` and `Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B` exhibit clear batch-variant behavior under these settings, whereas `meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct` does not show the same sensitivity, likely due to differences in architecture, kernel implementations, or optimization choices in their respective stacks.

> ### 2.2 Recommended Solutions  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Recommended Solutions
```

When using DTensor with TP > 1, or when `probs_ratio != 1` is observed in an on-policy setting, the following mitigation strategies are recommended to restore numerical consistency and stabilize training:

- **Align micro-batch sizes**:
  Configure `train_micro_batch_size` and `logprob_batch_size` to be exactly equal so that both the training forward pass and the logprob evaluation traverse identical kernel configurations and batching patterns. This alignment minimizes batch-variant behavior in underlying kernels and ensures that `current_logprobs` and `prev_logprobs` are computed under the same numerical conditions, which in turn drives `probs_ratio` back toward 1.
- **Force an on-policy ratio**:
  In strictly on-policy scenarios, enable the `loss_fn.force_on_policy_ratio` flag to explicitly set `probs_ratio` to 1 during loss computation. This option is appropriate only when the data are guaranteed to be collected from the current policy, and the theoretical importance-sampling ratio should be exactly 1; under these assumptions, clamping the ratio removes spurious numerical noise introduced by minor logprob mismatches while preserving the correctness of the training objective.

> ## 3. Row-Wise TP Plan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Row-Wise TP Plan
```

      d_{\text{out}}^{(1)} + d_{\text{out}}^{(2)} = d_{\text{out}}.
$$
   
   Each GPU gets the **full input** $x$ and computes: $y_1 = xW_1^T ,\quad y_2 = xW_2^T$, then we **concatenate** along the output dimension: $y = \left[ y_1, y_2 \right]$.

### 3.1 Root Cause

Our analysis shows that the **row-wise (colwise) tensor parallel (TP) plan** is a primary driver of the observed spikes in metrics and the instability of the reward model when TP is enabled. Row-wise tensor parallelism inevitably introduces cross-device reductions on the output activations. In the row-wise case, each rank produces a partial output $y_i$, and these partial results must be summed across GPUs to form the final $y=∑_iy_i$. Although floating‑point addition is mathematically associative, its implementation in finite precision is **non-associative**, so [changing the summation order can lead to different numerical results](https://arxiv.org/html/2408.05148v3) and the accumulated error can grow over long reduction chains. This makes large distributed reductions—such as the cross‑GPU adds required by row-wise TP—particularly vulnerable to run‑to‑run variability and small but systematic drift.

> By contrast, when the entire reduction is executed within a single device and on the same tensor core pipeline, the execution order and kernel implementation are typically fixed for a given problem size, which tends to yield deterministic and more numerically stable results for repeated runs with the same inputs. In other words, on a single GPU the hardware and library stack generally ensure that the same matmul and accumulation schedule is reused, so the rounding pattern is at least consistent, even if it is not perfectly exact. However, once the computation is split across multiple GPUs, the final sum depends on the collective communication pattern (for example, ring or tree AllReduce), thread scheduling, and low‑level communication libraries. These factors are not guaranteed to be deterministic and can change the effective addition order, leading to additional rounding error and small cross‑rank discrepancies in the aggregated outputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By contrast, when the entire reduction is executed within a single device and on the same tensor core pipeline, the execution order and kernel implementation are typically fixed for a given problem size, which tends to yield deterministic and more numerically stable results for repeated runs with the same inputs. In other words, on a single GPU, the hardware and library stack generally ensure that the same matmul and accumulation schedule is reused, so the rounding pattern is at least consistent, even if it is not perfectly exact. However, once the computation is split across multiple GPUs, the final sum depends on the collective communication pattern (for example, ring or tree AllReduce), thread scheduling, and low‑level communication libraries. These factors are not guaranteed to be deterministic and can change the effective addition order, leading to additional rounding error and small cross‑rank discrepancies in the aggregated outputs.
```

    "model.layers.*.self_attn.v_proj": ColwiseParallel(),
    "model.layers.*.self_attn.o_proj": RowwiseParallel(),
    "model.layers.*.mlp.up_proj": ColwiseParallel(),
    "model.layers.*.mlp.gate_proj": ColwiseParallel(),
    "model.layers.*.mlp.down_proj": RowwiseParallel(),
    "lm_head": ColwiseParallel(output_layouts=Shard(-1), use_local_output=False),
}

numerical_stable_parallel_plan = {
    "model.embed_tokens": RowwiseParallel(input_layouts=Replicate()),
    "model.layers.*.self_attn.q_proj": ColwiseParallel(),
    "model.layers.*.self_attn.k_proj": ColwiseParallel(),
    "model.layers.*.self_attn.v_proj": ColwiseParallel(),
    "model.layers.*.self_attn.o_proj": ColwiseParallel(
        input_layouts=Shard(-1),
        output_layouts=Replicate(),
        use_local_output=True,
    ),
    "model.layers.*.mlp.up_proj": ColwiseParallel(),
    "model.layers.*.mlp.gate_proj": ColwiseParallel(),
    "model.layers.*.mlp.down_proj": ColwiseParallel(
        input_layouts=Shard(-1),
        output_layouts=Replicate(),
        use_local_output=True,
    ),
    "lm_head": ColwiseParallel(output_layouts=Shard(-1), use_local_output=False),
}
```

> ## 4. Additional Observations and Insights

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Additional Observations and Insights
```
